Maggie Dobson
LIS 545 Data Curation
March 2026
Final Report
________________
Data and Metadata Profile
Option A: A Standard Project Using Github, using a dataset from Kaggle. 
Dataset: Epicurious - Recipes with Rating and Nutrition by HugoDarwood
Data
        This dataset includes recipes and their associated titles, descriptions, directions, ingredients, categories, ratings and nutrition information. Comments or reviews are not included. The data were drawn from Epicurious, a website owned by Conde Nast that compiles and shares recipes by contributors, and has a paywall for some content. Epicurious is unlike other websites such as AllRecipes which publicly host user submitted recipes for free. 
        The original stakeholders for this data were the recipe authors, the editors of Epicurious who profit off of the recipes, and the users who interact with these recipes by sharing, making, or commenting on them. The creation of this dataset changed the stakeholders, who are now the dataset creator and a variety of people who are using this dataset as data, rather than as recipes. Kaggle’s “What have you used this dataset for?” section indicates that the dataset has been used for learning, research, application, and LLM fine-tuning. Much of the code associated with the dataset is for regression challenges, food-related generative AI agents, and some analyses and classification projects. 
        The dataset includes 4 files: a ‘full_format_recipes.json’ file that includes all of the recipe metadata and data; a recipe.py file that was used to create the dataset; a utils.py file containing a script to turn a column of lists into columns of binary values; and a epi_r.csv file showing a dataframe of various values about the data. These standard file formats can be opened and viewed within Kaggle or downloaded without special software. There do not appear to be any usage restrictions on this dataset, and Kaggle lists the license as “unknown”. 
Metadata
        In the original recipes, the metadata included the title, author, date, and description. However, when the dataset was created, and the purpose of each recipe was no longer instructions for cooking, the metadata was transformed. When the purpose of the dataset is to, for example, train AI agents who will generate recipes, the titles become necessary datapoints. Because of that transformation, more metadata needed to be added to the dataset. 
        The .json file with all the recipe data includes a standard set of metadata for each recipe, which is also used to organize the columns of the dataframe in the .csv file. There are 11 metadata fields for each recipe, and they appear to be in random order as follows: directions, fat, date, categories, calories, desc, protein, rating, title, ingredients, and sodium. The nutrition information appears as integers; the directions, categories, and ingredients are lists; and the date is a string. Each data point has an associated metadata field, so in that way it is comprehensive. It does not appear to be structured according to any specific metadata standard, although there is a suggested recipe schema on schema.org and metadata specifications submitted to Prism. 
Data Enrichment
        This dataset could be made more discoverable and more accurate if it had better documentation and additional recipe data. Kaggle’s datasets include a Discussion section where users and Kaggle staff can make recommendations and ask questions. The discussion on this dataset includes recommendations from the Head of Product at Kaggle and a few questions from users. These include several sound recommendations for data and metadata enrichment.
        The first suggestion is for more detailed context around why the dataset was created and what it contains. The context note reads simply “I created this dataset to explore different factors affecting people’s enjoyment of food and/or cooking.” I would argue that while the ratings alone could be used to assess people’s enjoyment of food, it would be difficult to draw conclusions without the inclusion of comments and reviews in the dataset. Although qualitative rather than quantitative, those comments could shed far more light on people’s enjoyment of cooking than ratings alone. A context note more accurately conveying the potential uses of this dataset may be helpful for those searching for specific applications. 
        The content note could also be more detailed. For example, rather than “over 20k recipes” it could list an exact number. The note also only briefly explains two of the four files associated with the dataset, rather than thoroughly describing each. Additional description would help unfamiliar users navigate the database and utilize it for their projects. 
        There are also a few comments about adding additional information from the original recipes to the dataset, such as reviews, number of comments, total cooking time, yield, and tags. I agree that including as much of the original content of the recipe as possible would be beneficial for many of the uses of this dataset. For example, predicting engagement with future recipe submissions would require information about past engagement, such as the number of comments. An automated meal planning program would ideally take cooking time into account, or look at tags such as “Quick & Easy” or “30 Minutes or Less”. Where more information about a recipe is available, it would be beneficial to include it. 
Publications
        No publications are listed with the dataset on Kaggle, but I was able to identify at least two academic papers that referenced the dataset in their research. I started by searching for the title of the dataset in the library catalog, and then switched to Google Scholar when I had no results. There I found the database referenced in two articles, a conference proceeding from India and a Bachelor thesis from Spain. Both had considered the database while designing automated meal planning systems. The thesis discussed why the author chose another larger dataset of recipes, citing “size, richness of user interactions, metadata quality, and ease of reuse” (Santiago 2025, 7). The Indian authors chose the Epicurious dataset over another with more recipes because it contained nutrition information, which was important for the meal plan monitoring system they were designing (Mohan et al. 2023, 598). Both cited several other similar datasets from Kaggle. 
Sources Cited
Darwood, Hugo. “Epicurious - Recipes with Rating and Nutrition.” Kaggle, circa 2017. https://www.kaggle.com/datasets/hugodarwood/epirecipes/data 
Editors of Epicurious. “About Us.” Epicurious, 4 October 2024. https://www.epicurious.com/about/about-us 
Kennedy, Diane. “PRISM Recipe Metadata Specification.” PRISM, 10 September 2020. https://www.w3.org/submissions/prism/prism-recipe.html 
Minifie, Kemp. “Classic French Vinaigrette." Epicurious, 27 January 2026. https://www.epicurious.com/recipes/food/views/classic-french-vinaigrette 
Mohan, Aryan, Shubhaditya Singh, and A. V. Kalpana. "Meal Plan Monitoring and Recommendation System." International Conference on Recent Trends in Data Science and its Applications, July 2023. DOI: rp-9788770040723.117
PRISM. “Guide to PRISM Recipe Metadata and XML Encoding.” IDEAlliance, 4 October 2012. https://www.w3.org/submissions/2020/SUBM-prism-20200910/Recipe_Guide.pdf 
Recipe. Schema.org. 2025. https://schema.org/Recipe 
Santiago, Alba Delgado. "RecipeTime: A Web Application to Support Sustainable and Personalized Meal Planning." Universidad Autónoma de Madrid, Escuela Politécnica Superior, May 2025. 
________________
Repository Profile
Option A: A Standard Project Using Github, using a dataset from Kaggle. 
Dataset: Epicurious - Recipes with Rating and Nutrition by HugoDarwood
Repository: UC Irvine Machine Learning Repository
Suitability
University of California Irvine’s Machine Learning Repository (MLR) is a repository for datasets related to machine learning. My dataset, a collection of recipes from Epicurious, would be a good fit for this repository because it has demonstrated use as training data for machine learning tools. One group of researchers has used the dataset to train a meal plan monitoring system which “uses a machine learning algorithm to analyse user activity patterns and dietary requirements, then suggests meals that align with those goals.” (Mohan et al, p. 595) Others have considered or used this dataset for machine learning and large language model fine-tuning. Many of the uses of the dataset in Kaggle are for regression challenges, and regression is one of the four categories of tasks that datasets in the MLR fall into. Adding this dataset to the Machine Learning Repository would make it available to users in a repository specific to that use, and could encourage further enhancements of the dataset.
Submissions and Scope
        The MLR is open for submissions of datasets from anybody who has made an account on the site. Accounts can be instantly created with an email address. Dataset submissions are considered donations. Prior to making a donation, contributors must remove all Personally Identifiable Information (PII) from their datasets and have explicit permissions to share them. It is unclear how UCI determines or verifies if the originator of a dataset has given their permission to share it. 
In addition, donors are required to agree that their datasets be assigned a DOI and licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International license (CC BY 4.0). That requirement indicates that all the databases UCI accepts can be used, adapted, and shared by anyone, for anything. As long as appropriate credit is given and the user indicates any changes to the source material, CC BY 4.0 licenses cannot be revoked by the creator. 
The MLR also has an option to link an external dataset rather than donate one. They have two submission requirements for this option, that “The dataset must be widely known and high quality for it to be accepted” and “The download link should be visible on linked page.” The metadata for linked external datasets includes a URL to the external page, but I was otherwise unable to see a difference in how the two types of datasets are displayed. Both submission mechanisms invite contributors to email the MLR with any questions, which presumably would involve human assistance. 
Submissions are required to include a dataset name and brief abstract, the number of rows or instances in the dataset, the data characteristics (ex. tabular, sequential, text), and the subject areas. Contributors must also indicate the associated tasks; classification, regression, clustering, or other. Optional submission information includes the number of features in the dataset, a DOI if one already exists, any graphics, and feature types (real, categorical, or integer). 
Despite making an account and attempting to navigate through the contribution process, I was unable to view the entire process for donating a database. It seems likely that requirements for file types, metadata fields, and documentation quality are explained at some point in the process. The MLR’s Github contains a list of metadata fields that can be expected when importing a dataset, most of which are contributor-supplied. They do not appear to follow a specific metadata standard, although they are standardized within the repository. 
The metadata also includes an “additional_info” section composed of free text fields providing further descriptive information about the dataset. These include a summary, purpose for the dataset’s creation, funding information, and other additional free text information about the dataset. The nine metadata fields in most of the .names files in the direct download DIP for each dataset differ slightly from those outlined in the Github repository. 
        The MLR accepts real and synthetic datasets that are usable in the realm of machine learning research. UCI requires the data to be in a usable format and have relevant documentation, but the content of the datasets can be anything usable in machine learning. The data vary quite a bit, from wine quality and heart disease data to information about automobile insurance risk. There are datasets in a number of subject areas and types, and each is associated with a specific machine learning-related task.
Data Access Mechanisms
No login is required to download data, although creating an account and logging in is a required step for submitting a new dataset. Datasets can be directly downloaded or imported in Python with a custom import package that is also available on Github. Only 208 out of the 688 datasets have a Python import option. When downloading a dataset directly, the DIP includes a .names file and one or more .data files. The .names files have 9 numbered fields describing the contents of the datasets in the .data files. These do not appear to directly parallel the metadata fields you can access via the MLR’s suggested Python code. 
For the Python option, users first install the ucimlrepo package, and then import the dataset directly into their code. The Python import button on each dataset pulls up the code to import the package and fetch the dataset, which can be easily copied into a notebook. You can also import manually using the unique identifier assigned to each dataset. The fetch function will then return dataframes, metadata, and variable details.* 
Sources Cited
Creative Commons. Attribution 4.0 International Deed. Accessed Feburary 2026. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ 
Darwood, Hugo. “Epicurious - Recipes with Rating and Nutrition.” Kaggle, circa 2017. https://www.kaggle.com/datasets/hugodarwood/epirecipes/data 
Mohan, Aryan, Shubhaditya Singh, and A. V. Kalpana. "Meal Plan Monitoring and Recommendation System." International Conference on Recent Trends in Data Science and its Applications, July 2023. DOI: rp-9788770040723.117
Santiago, Alba Delgado. "RecipeTime: A Web Application to Support Sustainable and Personalized Meal Planning." Universidad Autónoma de Madrid, Escuela Politécnica Superior, May 2025. 
University of California Machine Learning Repository. Website accessed February 2026. https://archive.ics.uci.edu/ 
University of California Machine Learning Repository. ucimlrepo Git Hub repository. Accessed February 2026. https://github.com/uci-ml-repo/ucimlrepo 
________________
Additional Information
Recommended Data Citation
Darwood, Hugo. (circa 2017). Epicurious - Recipes with Rating and Nutrition. Kaggle [dataset]. https://www.kaggle.com/datasets/hugodarwood/epirecipes/data 
Preservation Considerations
This dataset contains .py, .json, and .csv files, all of which are not proprietary. Python is open source, but you will need to have it downloaded in order to open .py files. None of these file formats are likely to become obsolete in the near future. 
Recommended Copyright License
This dataset’s license is listed as unknown on Kaggle, but a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International license will be required for inclusion in the UCI Machine Learning Repository. The CC BY 4.0 license will ensure that anyone can use the dataset for any purpose, so long as it is appropriately cited. 
Human Subject Considerations
This dataset contains no personally identifiable information. During the creation of the dataset, the names of the recipe authors were omitted because they were not seen as relevant to the purpose of the dataset. Therefore, no efforts need to be taken to anonymize the data.